# core-github-actions-runner

Configuration for generating the OS images used by Elvias GitHub Actions runners.

The image is generated in the GitHub workflow [generate-image.yml](.github/workflows/generate-image.yml) using Packer.
Packer will also publish the image to Azure.

The GitHub Actions runners used by Elvia (`elvia-runner`) are created dynamically by [Actions Orchestrator](https://github.com/3lvia/core/tree/trunk/src/actions-orchestrator) and are based on the image generated by this repository.
The Terraform configuration for the all the infrastructure not created by [Actions Orchestrator](https://github.com/3lvia/core/tree/trunk/src/actions-orchestrator) (e.g. networking) is located in [core-terraform](https://github.com/3lvia/core-terraform).
The credentials for authenticating to Azure are stored in GitHub environment variables/secrets and are also configured in [core-terraform](https://github.com/3lvia/core-terraform).

## ⚡ Quickstart

Change your GitHub Actions workflows from `ubuntu-latest` to `elvia-runner`:

```yaml
runs-on: elvia-runner
```

## Updating the image

### Syncing with upstream

The configuration for the image is based on the [runner-images](https://github.com/actions/runner-images) repository (aka 'upstream').
We use a [Go script](main.go) to apply our own modifications to the upstream configuration.
All these changes are reproducible, meaning **no manual edits should be made to the configuration located at** `runner-images/`**!**
This is because any manual changes would be overwritten later when we run the Go script to sync with the upstream repository.

Syncing this repository with [runner-images](https://github.com/actions/runner-images) should be handled automatically by the GitHub workflow [sync-upstream.yml](.github/workflows/sync-upstream.yml).
This workflow will run on a schedule and check for changes in the upstream repository, and create a pull request if necessary.
The pull request should include a short guide on how to proceed with merging the changes.

If you want to manually sync with the upstream repository, you can run the following command:

```bash
go run main.go
```

Go, Packer and git must be installed on your machine for this to work.

### Removing software

We remove some software from the image to reduce build times.
To remove software from the image, edit the `removeSoftwareList` variable in [main.go](main.go).
After editing the file, run the following command:

```bash
go run main.go --apply
```

This should remove the required configuration from Packer and also remove the installation script.
You can double check by checking the git diff.

### Adding software

To add software to the image, edit the `addSoftwareList` variable in [main.go](main.go).

You will also need to supply an installation script in the [scripts](scripts) directory.
See [scripts/install-trivy.sh](scripts/install-trivy.sh) for an example.
Your script **MUST** follow the same naming convention, i.e.: `install-<software>.sh`.

As with removing software, run the following command:

```bash
go run main.go --apply
```

This should add the required configuration to Packer and copy the installation script to the correct location.
You can double check by checking the git diff.

### Unremoving or unadding software

If you have previously removed or added software and want to revert the changes, you can run the following command:

```bash
go run main.go
```

This will clone a fresh copy of the upstream repository and try to reapply the changes.
**If you are out of date with the upstream repository, this will also include any new (unrelated) changes.**
It is recommended to sync with upstream using the above command if you are out of date, before trying to edit the `removeSoftwareList` or `addSoftwareList` variables.

## Development

We use trunk-based development, and two environments `prod` and `dev`.
Any pull request to the `trunk` branch will generate and push an image to the `dev` environment.
After merging to the `trunk` branch, the image will be pushed to the `prod` environment.
Any new runners created by [Actions Orchestrator](https://github.com/3lvia/core/tree/trunk/src/actions-orchestrator) in `dev` will use the `dev` image, and the same for `prod`.

The prod runners are available with the label `elvia-runner` and the dev runners are available with the label `elvia-runner-dev`:

```yaml
runs-on: elvia-runner # prod runner
runs-on: elvia-runner-dev # dev runner
```

When testing, open a pull request to trunk and generate your image, which will be deployed to the `dev` environment.
SSH access is enabled for the dev environment, so you can connect to the VM and test your changes.
SSH access is configured in [core-terraform](https://github.com/3lvia/core-terraform), and you must provide your own public key.
